--- 
layout: post
title: "Revisiting Final Fantasy VII"
published: true
type: post
status: publish
preview: all
---

## Hello old friend

I recently replayed Final Fantasy VII. My memory is that it was so great it should have raised the bar for role-playing games forever. It didn't, though: this was the perfect storm of high production value, before costs got so out of control that games stopped taking risks. Is it as good as I remembered it? Here are some scattered thoughts of the good and the bad. Spoilers abound.

## A Game of Games

Everything is a minigame. This is just brilliant game design. You're rarely just wandering or exploring. If you're climbing an ice mountain, you're making sure you take breaks to keep your body temperature high enough. Riding a motorcycle out of the city and fighting off persuers isn't a cutscene, it's a full-fledged action game. Even performing CPR is a mini-game. It's one you can't lose, but when you play it all you feel is that a life is in your hands.

I'm surprised this type of gameplay hasn't been copied more often in newer RPGs, or even in newer Final Fantasy games.

## The Setting

The setting is complex, compelling, and surprisingly consistent despite its variety. They take the fantasy steampunk (makopunk?) concept and make it a convincing living world rather than just a background aesthetic. The setting supports the man vs. nature themes of the game and is part of the story itself.

The soundtrack is a masterpiece in itself. Some of the best songs are not the most memorable ones. Most people seem to recall the bombastic final battle theme, but the forboding, the meloncholy, and the bittersweet background music is more true to the FFVII world. The music is also incredibly diverse, which is necessary to support the diversity of the world itself.

A famous part of the game is the sleazy Don Cornio affair early on. If you're not familiar, let's just say crossdressing is involved. I don't understand how this was so well done, but it had great comedy and wasn't insulting. I'm pretty sure this was a formative experience of some kind for me. That's is far as I'm willing to consider that notion.

The fact that you get to choose your final quip at Don Corneo before you inevitably fall to the sewer... it feels like personality and ego is part of the gameplay, just as it is part of the world. The game is full of little dialog flourishes like this.

## Cloud

The story of FFVII is great, but also notoriously confusing. The most confusing details concern Cloud's past. They introduce misinformation and never explicitely debunk it. When the truth is revealed it doesn't make you feel too sure you really got it straight.

For example, is Cloud:

* a SOLDIER? (Cloud said so)
* a 5 year old clone? (Sephiroth said so)
* a normal Shinra soldier that Hojo experimented on? (yes)

In general, Cloud is a great protagonist. He is a stylish and cool, but he's got an onion's worth of layers to peel back over time. His are the perfect boots to inhabit while exploring this world.

## Aeris

Her death is right after the date scene. Part of the impact is because the last thing you were talking about was your future together. It's subtle, but they deftly tug your heart one way and then the other.

On the other hand, the scene where Cloud is possessed and beating up Aeris when Cait Sith Mark 2 suddenly introduces himself is the worst thing in the game. It's like they tried to ruin the most important part of the game, but somehow failed.

## Sephiroth

Jenova is an alien, but they never call it that. Jenova is a "Calamity from the Sky", a disease that infects the life of the planet itself. Much classier. Somehow, Jenova was never a risk until Shinra started using its power to make superhumans. The most dangerous of those was Sephiroth, who learns from Jenova's will to dominate the planet. Does any other villain have such a powerful backstory?

Sephiroth became a monster in the events before the game started. He rarely says or does anything of interest during the game's timeline, but through flashbacks and stories that elucidate the past, Sephiroth becomes a most fascinating villain. This gives Sephiroth a sense of being mythical as well as being real. It's tremendously effective.

## Disc 1

One thing that becomes immidiately clear is that this game is better-directed than most movies: I was often in awe of the powerful storytelling. The characters each inspire your love in their own days. Sparks are flying. There are so many memorable moments: from Cloud looking up at the looming Mako reactor he is about to go destroy, to the team gathered around the campfire at Cosmo Canyon sharing their hopes and fears for their uncertain future.

A great chunk of the game takes place in Midgar before you ever learn you are going to travel out into the wide world beyond. This does wonders to give the world depth. It also creates a powerful contrast between the Shinra world and the world of those beyond. Midgar represents the dystopian future that hasn't taken hold of the world at large yet. Despite all the machinary it's a very human city. The mixing extreme poverty and wealth is an very relevant theme.

The long flashback in Kalm after you leave Midgar is very interesting from a narrative perspective. It effectively recontextualizes the entire game. And it succeeds: suddenly you feel like there is so much more, when there has already been so much. It's overwhelming.

From there on you're travelling through the world ostensibly chasing Sephiroth. Really you're falling in love with the world you're tasked with saving.

The game has you fully enthralled through Disc 1, which is the majority of the game.

## Disc 2

Disc 2 is filler. There are some cool things, such exploring the icy north and Tifa's escape from Junon. Cool, but not important. After that it's fetch quests that are poorly-justified and, well, a little boring. When things pick up again you go into outer space then revisit Midgar. A lot of it seems pointless, but it is nice to wrap up subplots for the main characters.

In general, it feels like the direction is missing during Disc 2. Sometimes it feels like the wrong music for the mood is playing. The storytelling lacks the rhythm it had in Disc 1.

Revisiting the Shinra HQ, an optional part of Disc 2, is really dissapointing. No one bothered to clean the blood off the floor after events at the beginning of the game? It feels more like an accident or glitch that you can explore this area again. Or maybe it's something that was never finished?

## Disc 3

Disc 3 is the disc where you can just go do wherever you want until you're ready to beat the game. Chocobo breeding is a common passtime at this point. The world feels huge and it is quite rewarding to visit old friends and discover new challenges.

The ending is incredible. This is the first time the game feels like Disc 1 again. Somehow you can have nostalgia for a game that you just finished. The ending includes some rare treats that make the world feel more real: seeing Midgar and meteor in the distance out a window from Kalm is a perspective you never saw while playing. What a wonderful way to make the world feel more alive, and to make the stakes feel that much higher.

You don't learn much about what happens directly after the game's events. All you really know is the fate of the planet. Ultimately that's what's important.

## Conclusion

The things that are good about this game are so good that even the conspicuously terrible parts don't to much to tarnish it. The completeness of its creative vision has inspired my imagination in a million ways in the years since I first played it. I'm glad I revisited it.
